Communication (#65)
LibreSolar/learn.libre.solar: docs/development/communication.md

# Communication

> In a simple PV setup, one device might be sufficient to handle the panels, battery charging and load switching. But with a growing system, more and more device are added, with specific tasks for which they are optimized. A few [BMS](../system/bms.md) for the batteries, a couple of [charge controllers](../system/charge_controller.md) and maybe even a database and a frontend to store and display settings and data series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a simple PV setup, one device might be sufficient to handle the panels, battery charging and load switching. But with a growing system, more and more device are added, with specific tasks for which they are optimized. A [BMS](../system/bms.md) for each battery, a couple of [charge controllers](../system/charge_controller.md) and maybe even a database and a frontend to store and display settings and data series.
```

> All these devices need to **communicate** with each other, with different requirements concerning speed, reliability or efficiency. For these network of devices (IoT = Internet of Things), several technologies have been developed. Similar to the [OSI model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model), different layers have been identified, but in this document we speak of the **application layer** and the **lower layers** which roughly corresponds to the data model and the data transportation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these devices need to **communicate** with each other, with different requirements concerning speed, reliability or efficiency. For these networks of devices (IoT = Internet of Things), several technologies have been developed. Similar to the [OSI model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model), different layers have been identified, but in this document we speak of the **application layer** and the **lower layers** which roughly corresponds to the data model and the data transportation.
```

This chapter will give an overview of existing and popular protocols.

## Requirements

To be able to compare protocols, some specifications should be postulated. These are arbitrary based on the needs identified for Libre Solar devices and could be changed e.g. for automotive needs.

### Lower layers

> 1. **Reliability:** Paket loss, ordering of pakets for multiframe messages etc. should be handled. The connection should be somewhat resistant to noise since devices like the charge-controller use large conductances and high currents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Reliability:** Packet loss, ordering of packets for multiframe messages etc. should be handled. The connection should be somewhat resistant to noise since devices like the charge-controller contain switching circuits and handle high currents.
```

3. **Speed:** To transmit larger amounts of logging data or even firmware updates, the speed should be considered.

### Application layer

1. **Schema-less:** The data structure should be discoverable and self-explaining. This means the client does not need to know the schema of the devices data, e.g. variable types and units should be delivered with the data, executable functions should can be identified etc.

2. **Flexible:** The protocol should be independent of those protocols used in lower layers. It is ok to assume data integrity completeness and correct order, which should be checked by lower layer protocols.

3. **Stateless:** Each request should be atomic regarding the information needed to process it. No session handling is done.

4. **Compact:** Overhead like headers or data representation should be compact. Especially with IoT, lower layer protocols and connections are not very powerful, so low data rates should be expected and addressed.

## Lower layers

### CAN

> The Controller Area Network (CAN) was developed by the automotive industry to connect the different systems within a vehicle. It is a multimaster, electrical noise tolerant two wire bus system. The logical level on the bus is achieved with a differential approach, allowing for cable distances of more than 100m. Each end of the bus has to be terminated using a termination resistor [1]. Differential logic means that the voltage difference between the two wires indicate wether a "high" (logic 1) or "low" (logic 0) is written. In CAN, these states are called "recessive" and "dominant" respectively. The voltage difference depends on the used standard, in 5V systems it is usualy around 2V.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Controller Area Network (CAN) was developed by the automotive industry to connect the different systems within a vehicle. It is a multimaster, electrical noise tolerant two wire bus system. The logical level on the bus is achieved with a differential approach, allowing for cable distances of more than 100m. Each end of the bus has to be terminated using a termination resistor [1]. Differential logic means that the voltage difference between the two wires indicate whether a "high" (logic 1) or "low" (logic 0) is written. In CAN, these states are called "recessive" and "dominant" respectively. The voltage difference depends on the used standard, in 5V systems it is usually around 2V.
```

The CAN Standard itself defines only the physical and data-link layer (layer 1 and 2 in OSI) with a maximum size of 8 bytes. In order to send larger messages, a protocol like [ISO 15765-2 - ISO-TP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_15765-2) can be used.

> CAN offers a transmission speed up to 5 MBits/s, which greatly decreases the possible wire length. With a speed of 500 KBits/s, wires up to 100m can be used.

Reviewer: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data-rate_units
```suggestion
CAN offers a transmission speed up to 5 Mbit/s, which greatly decreases the possible wire length. With a speed of 500 kbit/s, wires up to 100m can be used.
```

Author: Why "kilo" lower case and "Mega" uppper case?

Reviewer: Because that's the way it is... see also the linked Wikipedia article. Lower-case m stands for milli (which does not make sense for bits, though).

#### Message Layout

There are two frame formats defined, the base frame format with 11 identifier bits and the extended frame format, using 29 bits for message identification [2].

The (simplified) base frame format:

| #Bits |  1  | 11 |  7  | 0 .. 64 |  16 |  2  |  7  |
|-------|:---:|:--:|:---:|:-------:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
|       | SOF | ID | CTL |   DATA  | CRC | ACK | EOF |

**SOF:** Start of frame <br />
**ID:** Unique Identifier which also determines the priority <br />
**CTL:** Control bits, including the length of data (0..8 bytes) <br />
**CRC:** Cyclic Redundancy Check, used to detect transmission errors <br />
**ACK:** Acknowledgment bits <br />
**EOF:** Bit sequence to signal the end of frame

> With the extended frame format, there are additionaly 18 bits used for the ID field which can be used to split the ID into message priority and target and source address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the extended frame format, 18 additional bits are used for the ID field which can be used to split the ID into message priority and target and source address.
```

#### Arbitration

Since CAN is masterless, every node on the bus can start sending at any time. To detect collisions, the transceiver always compares its output to the input. If another device with a higher priority (lower ID) is sending at the same time, a difference between input and output will be detected and the lower priority device will retreat.

### UART

The Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter is the most common serial communication used in MCUs. It has a receive (RX) and a transmit (TX) line, which are cross-connected between two devices. It allows only two connected devices and does not need any additional wiring, both microcontrollers should share the same ground and the same maximum voltage.

Since there are only two devices and separate wires for sending and receiving, no identification or arbitration is needed. UART does not implement any error checking, so higher layers need to check for data integrity.

### Bluetooth

> Bluetooth (BT) is a widely used wireless connection protocol developed for medium-bandwidth, low range applications. Different versions are available for low-energy, high-speed or basic needs. For many application layer protocols, the Serial Port Profile is mostly suited as it simulates a serial interface and is therfore interchangeable with UART or USB

Reviewer: The serial port profile is only available in "old" Bluetooth, but not in BLE. For BLE (which is more common today, I guess) a custom profile can be created that provides similar behavior. Can you please add this information?

### USB

> The Universal Serial Bus uses differential logic levels with two wires, just like CAN. It is implemented as a primary/secondary topology, meaning a host device initiates and organises communication to connected peripheric devices. Each devices has its own unique address and broadcasting is not possible. Since USB was developed for desktop use with high-bandwidth and low cable range, it is not widely used for MCU communication. It is however often used to connect a MCU with a PC via an USB-to-UART converter for programming and debugging. In this case, the same rules as for [UART](#UART) applies concerning error checking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Universal Serial Bus uses differential logic levels with two wires, just like CAN. It is implemented as a primary/secondary topology, meaning a host device initiates and organizes communication to connected peripheral devices. Each devices has its own unique address and broadcasting is not possible. Since USB was developed for desktop use with high-bandwidth and low cable range, it is not widely used for MCU communication. It is however often used to connect a MCU with a PC via an USB-to-UART converter for programming and debugging. In this case, the same rules as for [UART](#UART) applies concerning error checking.
```

### MQTT

The Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) protocol is mainly used for device-to-device communication in a publish/subscribe manner. It was designed for both a small code and bandwidth footprint required in restricted environments like IoT [3].

A Broker is used to manage all communication between the devices. It receives any published data and sends it to all subscribers. The data is organized in topics and a client can both subscribe and publish. Multiple devices can publish and subscribe to the same topic.

More detailed explanations and guides can be found [here](https://www.hivemq.com/mqtt-essentials/)

### CoAP

The Constrained Application Protocol is designed for restricted environments as an alternative or connection layer to [HTTP](#HTTP) [4]. It features a subset of HTTP request methods and return values and follows the same client/server pattern without publish/subscribe features. In contrast to MQTT, COAP relies on UDP connections and the entire frame cannot be larger than the UDP datagram (~64 KBytes). Therefor, sending or receiving larger amounts of data has to be handled by the application itself.

### HTTP

> The Hypertext Transfer Protocol and the secured version HTTPs is the main standard in modern web applications. It features many request types, a sophisticated range of return values along with the possibility to define custom headers. HTTP follows the request/response scheme, so there is always a server and a client involved. The payload is send as the "body", which can be of any type and the size is only limited by the client/server implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hypertext Transfer Protocol and the secured version HTTPS is the main standard in modern web applications. It features many request types, a sophisticated range of return values along with the possibility to define custom headers. HTTP follows the request/response scheme, so there is always a server and a client involved. The payload is sent as the "body", which can be of any type and the size is only limited by the client/server implementation.
```

> Due to its complex functionalities and therefor increased overhead and code size, it is not very well suited for IoT applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to its complex functionalities and therefore increased overhead and code size, it is not very well suited for IoT applications.
```

HTTP does not implement error checking and relies on lower layer protocols to care for data integrity. Due to its complexity, overhead can be quite significant e.g. just the header section can be up to 1 KByte.

> ### MODBus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Modbus
```

Modbus RTU and Modbus TCP are quite old, quasi-standard protocols to read and write registers of a device. Modbus requires knowledge of the accessible register addresses and the data format. A method to discover available settings and measurement values is not possible, so it does not fulfill the requirement to be self-describing.

> ### CANOpen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### CANopen
```
